= NaCl

A library that wraps part of djb's NaCl "networking and cryptography" library.

Find out more about that project at http://nacl.cace-project.eu/.

== Prerequisites

This library requires MRI Ruby 1.8 or 1.9.  It should work anywhere where NaCl compiles (most UNIXes).

You must first install the NaCl C library before installing the gem.  If you use homebrew on OS X, this is as simple as:

  brew install nacl

== Install

  gem install nacl

== How To Use

=== Public-key Authenticated Encryption

Want to provide <b>authenticated encryption</b>?  Easy:

  alice_pub, alice_sec = NaCl.crypto_box_keypair
  bob_pub, bob_sec = NaCl.crypto_box_keypair

  # Alice and Bob exchange their public keys.
  # Now Alice can make a message for Bob:

  nonce = SecureRandom.random_bytes(NaCl::BOX_NONCE_LENGTH)
  ciphertext = NaCl.crypto_box("Meet me at the park at midnight", nonce, bob_pub, alice_sec)

  # Alice then sends [ciphertext, nonce] to Bob and he can decrypt:

  NaCl.crypto_box_open(ciphertext, nonce, alice_pub, bob_sec) # => "Meet me at the park at midnight"

=== Public-key Authentication

Just want to sign the text, but not encrypt it?  No problem:

  alice_pub, alice_sec = NaCl.crypto_sign_keypair

  # Alice sends Bob her public key.
  # Now Alice can make a message for Bob:

  signed_text = NaCl.crypto_sign("Meet me at the park at midnight", alice_sec)

  # Alice then sends [signed_text, nonce] to Bob and he can validate the signature:

  NaCl.crypto_sign_open(signed_text, alice_pub) # => "Meet me at the park at midnight"

  NaCl.crypto_sign_open(signed_text.gsub("park", "bus stop"), alice_pub) # raises NaCl::OpenError

=== Secret-key Authenticated Encryption

Secret key encryption requires that the two parties share a key beforehand using some secure channel.

  key = SecureRandom.random_bytes(NaCl::SECRETBOX_KEY_LENGTH)

  # Alice and Bob share the key by some secure means.
  # Now Alice can make a message for Bob:

  nonce = SecureRandom.random_bytes(NaCl::BOX_NONCE_LENGTH)
  ciphertext = NaCl.crypto_secretbox("Meet me at the park at midnight", nonce, key)

  # Alice then sends [ciphertext, nonce] to Bob and he can decrypt:

  NaCl.crypto_secretbox_open(ciphertext, nonce, key) # => "Meet me at the park at midnght"

== Licence

This wrapper library licensed under the MIT licence.  Copyright 2012 Roger Nesbitt.
